# Project description 
Analyzed Federal Reserve Economic Data (FRED) - US Unemployment Rate which contains monthly US unemployment rates from 1948 to 2025 to understand the unemployment trends which impacts the US economy, crucial for risk assesment and understanding economic cycles.

# Virtual environment setup instructions

Shell commands to setup the virtual enviornment

 # Create and activate virtual environment
 uv venv --python 3.12
 source .venv/bin/activate
 uv pip install pandas matplotlib jupyter ipykernel

# Set up Jupyter kernel
 python -m ipykernel install --user --name=business-analysis --display-name="Business Analysis (UV)"

# How to run the analysis

- Clone the repository
- Setup the virtual enviornment and set up the jupyter kernel
- Open a jupyter notebook and select the virtual enviornment setup previously
- Run each cell in the unemployment_analysis.ipynb file

# Key findings from analysis

- From 1948 to 2025, the average monthly U.S. unemployment rate was 5.68%, with periods of stability disrupted by major economic crises like the 2008 financial crash and the COVID-19 pandemic.
- Unemployment spiked to 14.8% in April 2020, but the labor market recovered rapidly over the following three years highlighting the role of digital adaptation and remote work in economic resilience.
- The 1990s had the lowest decade level volatility (standard deviation of 1.05%), making it an ideal for business expansion, product launches, and workforce investment.

# Data source attribution

The dataset was obtained from the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis (FRED):
 **Dataset Name:** UNRATE – Civilian Unemployment Rate, Seasonally Adjusted
 **Source URL:** https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/UNRATE
 **Publisher:** U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS)
 **Frequency:** Monthly
 **Date Range:** January 1948 – April 2025

# GenAI usage acknowledgment
  **Tools used**: ChatGPT

  **Codeblocks Generated by GenAI**
  *"Lines" referenced in unemployment.py file*
  
  Lines: 147 - 160 to determine after how many months did unemployment rate take to recover to pre crisis levels (~ close to overall monthly 
  average unemployment rate)
  Prompt Used: Help me write the code for how many months until the unemployment rate was less than 6% and the first month when it was 
  observed.

  Lines: 220; pd.DateOffset function to calculate the month 10 years before the latest entry in the dataset
  Prompt USed: I need to calculate rolling 10 year window from April 2025, what function should i use and how?

  Lines: 249 - 251 to visulaise the 2008 crisis on the unemployment trend chart
  
  Prompt Used: Here is the baseline code of the visualisation I am working on [code inserted], I want to add the 2008 crisis to it, it 
  should clearly demonstrate the period, write an initial code for that.

  **Writing Assistance**
  Checked results.txt for any spelling errors.






